Saturn's largest moon, Titan, has long intrigued scientists searching for life in our solar system. A new study suggests that the planet's largest crater may have experienced the necessary conditions for the origin of life, as announced by its authors at this week's Lunar and Planetary Science Conference.

The surface of the natural satellite is covered in organic hydrocarbons, and it is believed to have an ocean about 100 kilometers below its icy crust. Researchers suggest that an asteroid or comet possibly crashed into the moon, mixing these two ingredients, which could have produced "a primordial soup necessary for life to develop," explains planetary geologist Álvaro Penteado Crósta.

To investigate this, the team modeled the impact of the moon's largest crater, Menrva, formed about 1 billion years ago. The model suggested that the 425-kilometer-wide crater was the result of a 34-kilometer space rock striking the surface at about seven kilometers per second.

According to the data, the impact's heat would have melted the ice, creating a lake in the crater, which persisted for a million years before refreezing due to Titan's low temperatures. Experts believe this may have been enough time for microbes to evolve, taking advantage of the liquid water, organic molecules, and the impact's heat. "That's quite good for bacteria," they say.

Although the team's research focused on Menrva, scientists believe that smaller impacts could have been sufficient to break through the ice layer in other moon craters. Even a much younger feature called Selk has the potential to "have some kind of fossilized bacteria preserved in the ice," says Penteado Crósta.

However, other researchers, such as Elizabeth Turtle, head of the Dragonfly mission at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, argue that there are still "no solid pieces of evidence" to support this scenario. Nevertheless, the probe set to fly to Titan may soon gather information that helps to bolster the proposed theory.
